[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Here we go.
We just gotta wait for
the car to warm up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
All right.
I think we're ready.
Let's go hit the trail.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My name is Sergei
Boutenko, and I'm
passionate about wild edibles.
After doing countless lectures
and workshops on edible plants
all over the world, I have
noticed approximately a dozen
edible plants that
I've been able to find
in North America, South
America, Europe, and Australia.
In this video,
I'm going show you
how to harvest and prepare the
most common wild edible plants.
Before we jump in, let's
cover some basic ground rules.
Number one, don't eat something
if you don't know what it is.
I cannot stress this enough.
Wildcrafting can
be safe and easy
if you follow this
one basic rule.
So be sure you can
positively identify
all the distinguishing
characteristics
of a wild edible plant
before you consume it.
Number two, try all new
plants in small amounts.
All of our bodies are
different, and thus may
have different reactions
to perfectly edible plants.
To avoid allergic
reactions and other mishaps
when eating new plants, limit
consumption to just a few
leaves.
Number three, don't mix
too many wild edible plants
together in a meal
before you know
how your body reacts to them.
For the purposes
of this video, I
will be playing with
lots of plants in order
to demonstrate how
I typically eat.
However, if you're
new to foraging,
I suggest that you keep
your mixing to a minimum.
Once you have some
experience under your belt,
then go ahead and mix all the
weeds you are familiar with.
In addition to
these three rules,
it's also a good
idea to consider
the environment in which you
plan to harvest wild edibles.
Every forager should aim to
avoid chemicals, pesticides,
and other contaminated areas.
The following places
are definite no-no's
for foraging-- railroads,
golf courses, major roadways,
and public areas
with heavy traffic.
If in doubt, ask around.
Do your research to figure
out if an area is clean.
A responsible
wildcrafter is one who
recognizes that he
or she can negatively
impact an area by overharvesting
its sensitive plant life.
As a conscious
forager you should
approach an ecosystem the
way that you would a garden.
When collecting wild
food, pick only what
you need for the next few meals.
Don't stock up for
the week or the month.
Many people think
that wild edibles only
grow in pristine
forest settings,
but it is often
quite the opposite.
Just as garden vegetables
like warm temperatures,
sunlight, and water,
so do wild edibles.
Thus, if you go looking
for tasty plant life
at high elevations,
in dark, forests,
or in regions that
are arid, you'll
likely come home empty handed.
Great foraging
spots are generally
near water and below
4,000 feet in elevation.
For this reason, I'm
shooting this movie
at my friend's organic farm.
Here we will find the most
common plants of the world,
and it is likely that these
same plants are growing
in your own backyard right now.
So without further ado,
let's dive in and pick
some wild edible plants.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The first wild edible I'd like
to introduce to you is grass.
As you can see, there's a
huge field of it behind me.
Grass is a great
beginner wild edible,
because it's easy to recognize
and it grows everywhere.
Worldwide, there's about
300 varieties of grass,
and all of them are
edible, which sort of makes
it the perfect survival food.
If you don't remember
anything else, remember this--
all grasses are edible.
It might not be the
tastiest meal you ever had,
but it will sustain
you and nourish you.
All grasses are going to be
rich in chlorophyll, vitamins,
and minerals, and
they're essentially
the same thing as wheatgrass.
Now because we're not livestock,
we're not cattle or goats,
it might be difficult
for us to digest grass.
So the way that
you'd eat it is you
pull on the top of some grass
and look for the tender light
green parts.
These tender light green
parts are a great lesson
in meristems.
Meristems or meristematic
parts are the growing parts
of a plant.
These parts are
going to be tender.
They're going to be saturated
with more sugars and proteins,
and thus they're going to be
tastier and more nutritious.
So whenever you feel a part of
a plant that's flexible, maybe
lighter green in color,
that is a meristematic part,
and that's the part you
want to munch down on.
Give it a try.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These yellow flowers
in front of me
belong to a plant
known as salsify,
or another common
name is goat's beard.
This is currently my
favorite wild edible.
They are the only dandelion
relative that's not bitter.
So the flowers and every other
tender part of this plant
is very, very
extremely delicious,
and can be eaten in
salads, sandwiches,
or as a trail-side nibble.
It's all edible, but
the most tasty parts
are the tender parts--
the meristematic
parts, if you will--
the growing parts that have
a lot of sugars in them, that
have flex and give.
Now all dandelions are loaded
with vitamins and minerals.
They're especially good for
our inner organs, our pancreas,
our kidneys, our liver.
The easiest way to identify
a salsify is by the flower.
These flowers come in
brilliant yellow and purple.
And the other distinguishing
characteristic
is that it has these green
sepals, these big green leaves
behind the flower.
Interestingly
enough, this flower
is only open during
the morning hours.
So if we were to come
back here around noon,
all of these flowers
would be shut.
So if you want to catch
the flower while it's open,
you've got to be an early bird.
As I go to harvest these, I also
want to point out my philosophy
on roots.
There's a certain
responsibility I
feel as a forager to harvest
plants in a manner that
will save some for other animals
and also allow the plant itself
to keep growing,
so I very rarely
harvest the roots of plants.
Instead, I pull out
my trusty scissors,
and I just snip it off the top.
I leave the roots
intact, and then I
throw my harvest in a bucket.
And perhaps this is a good
time to also point out
that wild edibles
are very perishable,
and so to preserve them while
harvesting, it's a good idea
to have bucket with cold water
as well as a little mister
so that you can mist them down.
And this acts as
refrigeration in the field.
Some other key
features that identify
salsify are these very
long grass-like leaves.
In late summer, these
flowers will also
turn into a huge
dandelion-like puff ball.
And so depending on which
stage you get it in,
you can either identify
it by the flowers,
the tall slender grass-like
stems, or the big puff balls.
So I'm just going
to go through here
and harvest some of the flowers
as well as the other tender
bits.
Right here, here's another
good thing to notice.
This is a flower that
hasn't opened yet,
and this part is
very tasty, in fact.
And I could just go like that.
You just go through here and
pick off all the tender parts
and throw those straight into
salads, sandwiches, your mouth.
I would also like to
point out that when
you break the stem of a
salsify, white sap oozes out.
This sap is perfectly
edible, and it
is very good for digestion
and your inner organs.
So don't be afraid
to eat the stuff.
I'm excited that we
got to see salsify.
These flowers will look
beautiful in our salad
later on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Wild mustard is best identified
by our sense of smell,
because wild mustards
always smell like mustard.
So if you crush up any part
of this plant, whether it
be the flowers, the leaves, or
the stem and give it a smell,
it should have a very
spicy mustard-like aroma.
Wild mustard is
insanely nutritious.
In fact, my friend and
fellow forager John Kallas
believes that wild mustard is
the number one most nutritious
plant out there.
It's got really nice broad
leaves that are spicy and will
be delicious in a stir fry.
So I'm going to go ahead
and mow this guy down.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Directly to my right,
you see yellow flowers
that are gumdrop-shaped.
These flowers are part
of pineapple weed,
and pineapple weed is
essentially wild chamomile.
Just like chamomile, pineapple
weed has soothing properties,
and this plant is best utilized
when dried and steeped in tea.
The easiest way to identify a
pineapple weed is by the smell.
And this is a great lesson
in using all of our senses
when foraging.
I advocate that all
new foragers get
in the practice
of using all five
of their senses, sight, hearing,
smell, touch, and taste,
because all of those
senses will give you
more information about a plant.
Now certain plants will be
easiest to identify with sight,
but other plants like this
will require other senses.
Pineapple weed actually
has kind of a fruity smell,
and it smells very much like a
blend of chamomile and fruit.
So the easiest way
to ID this plant
is to crush up one of the
flowers and give it a smell,
and it smells sort
of like pineapple.
Additional features
that will help you
ID it are the yellow
pineapple-like flowers
and the tiny little
leaves that are
in leaflets under the flowers.
They look very much
like dill leaves.
Because I'm making
a salad later on,
this weed is not going to
be necessarily appropriate
for the salad, so I'm going
to let it be in the ground.
But now you know that
this is pineapple weed
and all parts are edible,
and you could utilize it
however you like.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I look directly to the
left of the pineapple weed,
right here in front of me
there's another edible plant.
This plant right here is
known as shepherd's purse,
and it's a type of wild mustard.
All wild mustards are edible.
Mustards are all
part of the Brassica
family, which includes plants
like arugula, cabbage, kale.
And the easiest way to identify
a mustard, again, is by smell.
When you crush up one of the
leaves and give it a sniff,
it should smell kind of
spicy, sort of like mustard.
I also want to point out that
it has heart-shaped seed pods,
and this is a great identifying
feature of shepherd's purse.
This entire plant is edible.
Today I'm after the tender
leaves as well as the seed
pods, and if I'm lucky, I'll
even get a few of the flowers.
I'm going to throw all
of those in the salad
to add a little bit
of spice and texture.
Now let's see what else
we can find on this farm.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In front of me I
have lamb's quarters,
which is one of the
most common plants found
all over the world.
It's a relative of quinoa.
In fact, if you were
to see quinoa growing
right near lamb's
quarters, it would
be hard to tell the
two of them apart.
This plant is one of the
richest plants in protein.
It's a very mild green.
It tastes kind of like
spinach, and it's a great green
in salads, smoothies.
It's very easy to eat.
It's very pleasant, so it's
a great beginner wild edible,
and it grows rampant on
organic farms and empty lots.
It's a common weed in
gardens, and it's very hard
to eradicate.
So you can literally
harvest this plant
until the cows come
home without fear
of worrying that you're going
to decimate the lamb's quarters
population.
The reason it's
called lamb's quarters
is because farmers used to
let their lambs graze on it.
So don't be afraid,
there's no meat products
within this plant.
It's just a name.
This plant is quite
easy to identify.
It's got a very hardy stem.
The stem also has purplish
pinkish lines all over it.
The leaves themselves
are covered
with a fine whitish, sometimes
purplish dust, and the dust
kind of rubs off and feels
very waxy to the touch.
And this is essentially
calcium, so you
don't need to wash that off.
You can eat it
straight with that.
Interesting little fact--
the same dust that you
see on the bottoms of
the leaves, on the leaves
themselves, acts as
a water repellent.
So if you were to dunk
the plant in water,
it would come out bone-dry
because of this dust.
The entire plant is edible,
although the smaller
the leaves the more nutritious
and the more delicious
they are.
Today I'm going to harvest
a bunch of this stuff
so that I can prepare some
tasty dishes with it later on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This right here is green
amaranth, another tasty common
weed.
It looks pretty similar
to lamb's quarters
except for a key difference.
The seed pod at the top
is very easy to identify.
So the key identifying
characteristic
with green amaranth is
the seed pod at the top.
It's spiky to the touch.
It has up to 15,000 seeds.
You don't really want
to eat that part.
You want to eat the leaves.
The leaves are the
part that we're after.
They're very tender,
great in salads.
And so with this
plant in particular,
I'm very interested
in the leaves
and not so interested
with anything else.
Now with green
amaranth, there is
a plant that looks
similar to this
that you don't
really want to eat.
It's a nightshade, like
a common nightshade.
So you really want to look for
these seed pods to make sure
that it's green amaranth
and not the nightshade,
and you want to make sure
the plant has smooth stems.
So smooth stems, seed pod,
green amaranth, green light.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In front of me I
have common mallow,
which is a close
relative of okra,
and it has a very
okra-like taste.
Another common
name for this plant
is cheeses or buttonweed
because it grows little fruits
in the shape of
buttons, which make
it very easy to ID this plant.
It's another great wild
edible weed for beginners
because it has a
very subtle taste.
It doesn't have a very strong
chlorophyll taste at all.
When the leaves get
really big, it's
a nice plant to use as wraps.
So we could put little pieces
of avocado in this plant
and wrap it up, maybe pour
some lemon juice on it.
It's a very nice little snack--
very simple, very fast.
The common identifying
characteristics
of common mallow is a long stem,
but the stem is not smooth.
It's got a little texture to it.
It's rough.
It also has leaves that
are overall disk shaped,
but they have lobes.
So there are some lobes.
The leaves can get pretty big.
Be mindful of that.
It also has white
to purple flowers.
The best way to ID common
mallow is by its little fruits,
also known as buttons.
They're little disk-like fruits
that have big green sepals.
They almost look
like little hops.
These are very delicious.
These parts right here
have the most okra flavor
of the entire plant.
The entire mallow
plant can be eaten.
You can boil it just
like you would okra.
You can use it in
gumbos, or you can
eat raw in salads or smoothies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We got purslane
growing right here.
And purslane is the number
one richest wild edible
in omega 3 fatty acids,
which makes it a great plant
to prevent any sort of
heart problems, Alzheimer's,
multiple sclerosis.
So it's a very good for
the heart and the brain.
Purslane is a
sprawling weed that
grows low to the ground through
commonly planted lettuces
and things, so you can
find it almost anywhere
growing in between your crops.
It's got a nice
lemony taste to it,
and it's really
delicious in smoothies.
I find that it helps
the smoothies stick
together better.
If you've ever made
a green smoothie
and then left it on the
counter, it tends to separate.
Well, if you add a green
in there like purslane,
it'll bind the smoothie
and act as a binding agent
so that you can later
go back to that smoothie
and it looks much more
appealing and appetizing.
Here are some identifying
characteristics.
Purslane looks like a succulent
and it's got a smooth stem.
It's got teardrop-shaped leaves.
Like I said before, it
sprawls along the ground.
So if we really look close,
like over here, baboom.
It has these big branches
that crawl along the ground,
and that's perhaps the best
identifying characteristic.
As purslane matures, it tends to
develop a red hue on the stem.
That's a great identifying
characteristic.
The entire plant is edible--
the stem, the
flowers, the greens.
The tender greens, the
meristematic parts,
the parts that are
growing, are going
to be the most nutritious
and the tastiest.
Throw the entire
plant in smoothies,
but if you're going
to use it in salads,
I recommend taking
just the leaves
and peeling it off the plant.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Quite often when you sit
down to harvest one plant
you can find other plants
in close proximity.
For example, here we have
prickly lettuce, dandelion,
and more mustard greens.
The prickly lettuce
and the dandelions
are the origin of all lettuces.
Thousands of years ago, before
romaine lettuce or red leaf
lettuce, there was prickly
lettuce and dandelions.
And my guess is that from
those origins people hybridized
lettuce because they wanted
a sweeter, bigger leaf.
So essentially they would
see a dandelion growing,
and it was kind of
bitter to the taste.
And they would look
for that variety
that was slightly sweeter
and had big leaves.
They'd wait for
it to go to seed,
and plant those seeds to get
even bigger, sweeter leaves.
And they did this
over and over again
until now we have
something that looks almost
nothing like a dandelion.
The nice thing about
these wild lettuces
is that they're
actually more nutritious
than store-bought lettuces.
They generally have
longer root systems.
Those roots can go down
below depleted topsoil
and draw out more
vital nutrients
for our bodies to assimilate.
Dandelions are perhaps one of
the most underappreciated weeds
out there.
Most people would never
think to eat a dandelion
and in fact curse them for
growing in their lawns.
But they're loaded with all
kinds of good stuff for us,
and they actually make for a
really tasty smoothie green.
They're a little bit
bitter to the taste,
but if you blend
them in a smoothie
with fresh fruit, no problem.
Most people could probably
identify a dandelion,
but let me give you some key
identifying characteristics.
For starters, the leaf
has jagged-like lobes.
In fact, in French it's
called dent-de-leon,
which means tooth of a
lion, and you can kind of
see that the lobes
that are sharp
resemble a tooth of a lion.
Dandelions also have
smooth stems and one
yellow flower per stem.
A fun little fact is that
you can eat the flowers.
They're very tasty.
They're great in salads.
And they actually concentrate
vitamin D from the sun,
and thus are a great little
additive for an emotional boost
in your meal.
A key tell to tell a
true dandelion apart
from its lookalikes
is the main vein.
If you flip the leaf
over and run your finger
along the main vein, dandelions
will always have a smooth stem.
Dandelion lookalikes will
have a fuzzy or prickly stem.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Directly to the left
of the dandelion,
we have what's known
as prickly lettuce.
At first glance, the leaves kind
of look like dandelion leaves.
But if you flip the
leaf over, you'll
notice that the main vein
has prickly thorns on it.
Check this out.
The dandelion on the left,
prickly lettuce on the right.
I'd also like to point
out that both plants have
milky white sap.
Because I'm making
a salad today,
I probably won't be harvesting
too much prickly lettuce.
But in my regular practice,
I often do harvest this plant
and blend it in a smoothie.
To my right, I also have
some wild mustard leaves.
Now earlier we picked some
yellow mustard flowers.
I'm going to pick
some leaves now
in order to fluff up the salad.
Just a quick reminder
that all mustard greens
smell like mustard.
So if ever in doubt, crunch
a leaf up, give it a smell,
and if it smells like
mustard, you're good to go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here we have a wild rose.
All roses are edible.
In fact, there's a saying "a
rose is a rose is a rose,"
which means that a
wild rose is very
similar to a domesticated rose.
Unlike domesticated roses,
wild roses have five petals.
But if you were to take
a domesticated rose
and let it go wild, it
would eventually returned
to its natural DNA,
which is five petals.
Another great identifying
characteristic of the rose
is the hardy stem with thorns.
All roses are edible.
In fact, a fun little tidbit
is that apples and blackberries
are actually part
of the rose family.
Roses are all rich
in iron, so they're
very good for
people lacking iron.
The flowers can be used
in salads, on desserts.
The leaves are
oval and serrated,
and when they're young
they're very tender
and can also be used in salads.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Some plants are sun-loving,
and this rose right here
is a sun-loving plant.
At the base of the rose,
you see miner's lettuce,
and miner's lettuce is
a shade-loving plant.
So not only are we
witnessing two plants that
love different
environments, we're
also witnessing a
symbiotic relationship.
The sun-loving plant
is casting shadow
for the shade-loving plant.
Come in a little closer, and
I'll show you miner's lettuce.
So miner's lettuce is one
of the tastiest wild edibles
I know of.
It's very mild to the taste.
It doesn't have a strong
chlorophyll taste.
It's essentially the romaine
lettuce of the weed world.
It's very rich in vitamin c.
In fact, one cup of this
stuff has about 90 milligrams
of vitamin C.
It's quite easy to identify.
It has big disk-like
leaves, and it
has a smooth stem
that goes directly
through the middle of the leaf.
Another great identifying
characteristic
is that miner's
lettuce all stems
from the exact same place.
I'm going to pick this miner's
lettuce, add it to the salad
later on, and it's going to go--
it's going to be
finger-licking good.
And so I'm cutting the stalks so
as not to eradicate the roots.
And here we have a nice batch
of freshly harvested miner's
lettuce that's going to
taste amazing in the salad.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now that the weeds are picked,
let's make a monster salad.
Before we start chopping,
it's a good idea
to give our wild
edibles a rinse.
And we're going to
do this just like we
would with any vegetables.
Going to dunk them in water
like so, give them a nice shake.
This is also a great
opportunity to pick
through your wild edibles.
Make sure you don't have
any foreign plants in there.
And then we're just going
to start chopping them.
We got our mustard greens.
Into the bowl they go.
We have some of our purslane.
The nice thing about
fresh food is that when
you have scraps you just
throw them back into nature.
So we got our juicy purslane.
I find that it's easiest
to just harvest it
straight with some
scissors into the salad.
I'm going for the
juiciest leaves,
but the stems will give
us some nice crunch
and nice organic compost.
Here we also have
our green amaranth.
Dunk.
Now with the green amaranth,
we don't necessarily
want the spiky seed head.
So I'm just going to pop off
the leaves into the salad,
and I'm going to
compost the seed heads.
Sometimes it's actually
faster to go with scissors,
so here I go again.
Find a technique
that works for you.
This is going to
taste really nice.
I've been waiting
for this all day.
Let's see.
What else do we got here?
Ah, miner's lettuce.
This is choice salad greens.
In they go.
Nice little rinse.
Grab our scissors.
The stems are juicy,
full of vitamin C,
so we definitely
want those in there.
Pull out some of these roots.
The little sticks, those
are just extra fiber.
Aha, lamb's quarters.
With some plants,
there's actually
a trick to getting
them off the stems,
and lamb's quarters
is one of those.
You can just hold the stem
firmly, slide your fingers
along it, and the leaves
will pop right off.
I'm not a terribly picky eater.
I don't mind a little
bit of fibrous parts.
So I tend to throw salads
together pretty quickly.
If you want to spend more
time and have less stems
in your salad, you're
very welcome to do so.
Some of this lamb's
quarters is nice and purple,
so it's going to add
some color to our salad.
If I were to be blending
this stuff in smoothies--
I have a very high-powered
blender at home,
so I'd just chop it up either
with scissors or a knife,
throw it straight
into the blender.
No muss, no fuss.
We got our common
mallow over here.
Same principle.
With common mallow, it really
is easier to use your scissors.
Just going to come in here
and chop the leaves straight
in the salad.
I personally love the
little buttons in the salad
as well, so I'm going
to add them for texture.
And if you are lucky enough
to have some flowers,
go ahead and chop those in.
This is going to add
some really nice crunch.
We've got some dandelion
greens in here,
some more mustard leaves.
Get some of those going.
And we have these beautiful
mustard flowers right here.
Those absolutely
must go in the salad.
So I'm actually
going to cut them.
I've been misting them all day,
so I don't want to rinse them.
Otherwise they're all going
to end up in the water.
So I'm going to cut them
straight into the bowl.
We also have some salsify
and some shepherd's purse.
Give that a rinse.
Remember with the salsify all
of the tender parts are edible,
so all the tender
parts of the stem
can be utilized in the
salad, especially the tops.
The tops, even if they're
an unopened flower,
taste very good.
Here's another top.
We also have our
shepherd's purse.
Remember those are
the heart-shaped ones.
And just like with
the lamb's quarters,
I'm going to hold them by the
stalk and slide them right in.
Quickest way to
harvest the seed pods.
All right.
Starting to come together
nicely I also brought with me
some condiments today.
For my field dressing,
I'm going to use
some olive oil, a little
balsamic vinegar, a little sea
salt, Bragg's Liquid Aminos,
and some nutritional yeast.
So just going to dress
it with olive oil.
I like to eyeball everything.
Bragg's.
And it looks like I forgot
my balsamic vinegar, so
no balsamic vinegar.
A little sea salt. And we have
some organic nutritional yeast.
And now we're going to give
it a good, nice long mix.
For the finale, I'm going to
put my flowers in the salad.
So I have my tasty salsify
flowers right there.
Those are going to go in on top.
I also have some wild rose.
Got my wild rose petals.
Straight into the salad.
And I happened
upon these daisies.
And daisies are part of
the sunflower family, which
is one of the largest
family of plants,
and all sunflowers are edible.
So these oxeye daisies are
definitely going in the salad.
Look at that.
You couldn't buy a salad
this good if you tried.
I hope that with this
video I have dispelled
some of the common fears
about harvesting wild edibles
and inspired you to
explore the outdoors
in a safe and conscious manner.
Now you have the tools
to take advantage
of these tasty hidden
treasures and you
can go out and reap all the
benefits that wild edibles have
to offer.
I recently learned that a banana
travels an average of 2,500
miles to get to the consumer.
Some of the disadvantages
of such practices
include loss of freshness,
food being harvested
before it's ripe, and a
massive waste of the Earth's
finite resources.
Wild edibles, on the other hand,
are an entirely local food.
You can harvest them
straight from the ground when
they are fresh, and the only
energy expended is your own.
We call this energy
expenditure exercise,
and it's recommended
by health experts
to be done on a daily basis.
In addition, harvesting free
food can save you lots of money
on your grocery bill.
And from a nutritional
standpoint,
wild food is superior to
store-bought food anyway.
If nothing else, foraging
exposes you to nature
and thus gets you
breathing fresh air,
collecting vitamin D on
your skin from the sun.
And in an era when we spend the
majority of our time in front
of screens, being outside
with weeds is invaluable.
Thank you for
watching this video.
For more information on
wild edibles and foraging,
check out my book.
It's available at
sergeiboutenko.com
and in bookstores near you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]